Chapter 12 final pass (#372)
browserengineering/book: book/scheduling.md

`Task` is supposed to occur, and compare against the current time in
the event loop. This is called *polling*, and is what, for example,
the SDL event loop does to look for events and tasks. However, that

> can mean wasting time in a loop until the task to be ready, so I

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can mean wasting time in a loop until the task is ready, so I
```

held while the task is running.

::: {.further}

> Unfortunately, Python currently has a [global interpreter lock][gil],

Reviewer: Isn't this go-further premature here, since we haven't yet talked about performance and parallelism?
Also, have we introduced the rendering pipeline at this point?

Author: Good point. I still think the GIL should go in front, when we introduce threads. Otherwise readers will feel a bit misled.

Author: I've edited the go-further to remove direct references to browser threads while still keeping the general point.

::: {.further}

`XMLHttpRequest` played a key role in helping the web evolve. In the
90s, clicking on a link or submitting a form required loading a new
pages. With `XMLHttpRequest` web pages were able to act a whole lot

> more like a dynamic application, with GMail one famous early

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more like a dynamic application; GMail was one famous early
```

example.[^when-gmail] Nowadays, a web application that uses DOM
mutations instead of page loads to update its state is called a

> [single-page app][spa]. SPAs enabled more interactive and complex web

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[single-page app][spa]. Single-page apps enabled more interactive and complex web
```

apps, which in turn made browser speed and responsiveness more
important.

[^when-gmail]: GMail dates from April 2004, [soon after][xhr-history]
enough browsers finished adding support for the API. The first
application to use `XMLHttpRequest` was [Outlook Web Access][outlook],
in 1999, but it took a while for the API to make it into other
browsers.

[outlook]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outlook_on_the_web
[xhr-history]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XMLHttpRequest#History
[spa]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-page_application

:::

The cadence of rendering
========================

There's more to tasks than just implementing some JavaScript APIs.

> Once something is a `Task`, the task runner controls when it runs:

Reviewer: You literally undid the edit I added yesterday. I added "perhaps" because it was unclear whether the use of "now" is in the "now, let me tell you something..." meaning vs "right this moment"

Author: Oy, my bad. I'll add back "perhaps" and then make it parallel in the other options.

        # ...
        browser.tabs[browser.active_tab].task_runner.run()
        browser.raster_and_draw()
        browser.schedule_animation_frame()
```

Now we're scheduling a new rendering task every 16 milliseconds, just
as we wanted to.

::: {.further}

> there's nothing special about 60 frames per second. Many displays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there's nothing special about 60 frames per second. Some displays
```

refresh 72 times per second, and some that [refresh even more
often][refresh-rate] are becoming more common. Movies are often shot
in 24 frames per second (though [some directors advocate

> 48][hobbit-fps]) while television shows often use 30 frames per

Reviewer: ```suggestion
48][hobbit-fps]) while television shows traditionally use 30 frames per
```

setTimeout(callback, 16);
```

> This sort of worked, there was no guarantee that the callbacks would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sort of worked, but there was no guarantee that the callbacks would
```

    some ideas on how to do this.

::: {.further}

Our toy browser spends a lot of time copying pixels. That's why
[optimizing surfaces][optimize-surfaces] is important! It'll be faster

> by about 30% if you've done the *interest region* exercise from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by at least 30% if you've done the *interest region* exercise from
```

    def run(self):
        while True:
            self.lock.acquire(blocking=True)

>             needs_quit = self.needs_quit

Reviewer: You'll need to introduce the variable and the code that sets it then. Is that really worth it?

Author: Ok, good point.

Do the same with any other calls from the `Browser` to the `Tab`.

So now we have the browser thread telling the main thread what to do
Communication in the other direction is a little subtler.

::: {.further}

Originally, threads were a mechanism for improving *responsiveness*

> via pre-emptive multitasking, not *throughput* (frames per second).

Reviewer: [^gil-second]: And our browser still doesn't do that, due to the GIL, lolz.

Author: ?

Reviewer: Nevermind, not important.

> Nowadays, even phones have several cores plus a highly parallel GPU,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nowadays though, even phones have several cores plus a highly parallel GPU,
```

        browser.schedule_animation_frame()
```

And that's it: we should now be doing render on one thread and raster
and draw on another!

::: {.further}

> The `needs_raster_and_draw` dirty bit doesn't just make the browser a

Reviewer: As mentioned in the other comment, I think this is a better place for the global lock go-further. We can move this go-further into a footnote.

Reviewer: How about adding the other sentences from the GIL go-further here? "The go-further in section X said some stuff; here is some more about the implications?" Anyway just an idea, if the sentences fit.

Author: See other thread.

```

Now, every tick of the counter has an artificial pause during which

> the main thread is stuck running JavaScript.[^adjust] This means it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the main thread is stuck running JavaScript. This means it
```

can't respond to any events; for example, if you hold down the down
key, the scrolling will be janky and annoying. I encourage you to try
this and witness how annoying it is, because modern browsers usually

> don't have this kind of jank.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don't have this kind of jank.[^adjust]
```

        # ...
```

But the main thread also needs to be able to modify the scroll offset.
We'll add a `scroll_changed_in_tab` flag that tracks whether it's done
so, and only store the browser thread's scroll offset if
`scroll_changed_in_tab` is not already true.[^scroll-complicated]

[^scroll-complicated]: Two-threaded scroll has a lot of edge cases,
including some I didn't anticipate when writing this chapter. For

> example, it's pretty clear that a load should force scroll to 0, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example, it's pretty clear that a load should force scroll to 0 (unless the browser implements 
[scroll restoration](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History/scrollRestoration)!, but
```

style, layout and paint. In our browser, these run on the main thread.
But could they move to their own thread?

In principle, yes. The only thing browsers *have* to do is implement
all the web API specifications correctly, and draw to the screen after
scripts and `requestAnimationFrame` callbacks have completed. The
specification spells this out in detail in what it calls the
[update-the-rendering] steps. The specification it doesn't mention
style or layout at all---because style and layout, just like paint and
draw, are implementation details of a browser. The specification's
update-the-rendering steps are the *JavaScript-observable* things that
have to happen before drawing to the screen.

[update-the-rendering]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#update-the-rendering

Nevertheless, in practice, no current modern browser runs style or
layout on off the main thread.[^servo] The reason is simple: there are
many JavaScript APIs that can query style or layout state. For

> example, [`getComputedStyle`][gcs] can't be requires first computing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example, [`getComputedStyle`][gcs] requires first computing
```

style or layout is not up-to-date, then it has to be computed then and
there. These computations are called *forced style* or *forced
layout*: style or layout are "forced" to happen right away, as opposed
to possibly 16ms in the future, if they're not already computed.
Because of these forced style and layout situations, browsers have to
be able to layout and style on the main thread.[^or-stall]

[gcs]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/getComputedStyle
[gbcr]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/getBoundingClientRect

[^or-stall]: Or the main thread could force the compositor thread to
do that work, but that's even worse, because forcing work on the
compositor thread will make scrolling janky.

[^servo]: The [Servo] rendering engine uses multiple threads to take
advantage of parallelism in style and layout, but those steps still
block, for example, JavaScript execution on the main thread.

[Servo]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Servo_(software)

[^nothing-later]: There is no JavaScript API that allows reading back
state from anything later in the rendering pipeline than layout.

> What's why we moved raster and draw to the browser thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This made it relatively easy for us to move raster and draw to the browser thread.
```
